To come and speak to it, and then we'll go through the legislative scrutiny
memo. So with that, I'm going to hand over,
Mr. Van der Molen.
Excellent.
The floor is yours.
Thank you very much, Mr. Costley. Appreciate that.
And committee members, it's great to be presenting here to you today on this
bill.
Obviously, had its first reading recently, and for me, I think it's an
important change, and I'll delve into some of the detail there,
but I've always been pretty passionate about this space, and I think quite
timely that it's had its first reading just pre-Anzac Day as well, and that we're
considering this bill now. Anzac Day, I think for all of us would've
been a very special day around the country,
and certainly in my electorate of the Waikato, I was hugely impressed with the
number of people that turned out to commemorate those
events over a long period of time. And so,
this is just another step in trying to acknowledge our
appreciation and respect for those that have served.
And so what I'm proposing to do here is relatively
simple.
It's modernizing the 20-- Sorry, the
1918 legislation, the Military Decorations and Distinctive
Badges Act of 1918. It has been
modified
in 1982, I believe it was, as
well with an addition through the Summary Offences Act put into this act.
So I'm really just looking to modernize it there.
And the key piece within that is around the monetary
value of the fine proposed for anyone that breaches
the legislation, i.e., those that effectively, the stolen valor
situation where someone wears medals that they are not entitled to wear
and misrepresents themselves in that fashion deliberately.
And so I think that's a pretty abhorrent practice, a pretty low thing
to do at a time when we should be acknowledging those that have
served and sacrificed, for someone to come along and try to claim that
acknowledgment without having put in any of the hard yards to earn it, I think is
hugely disrespectful, frankly. So modernizing it from what is currently
a fine of $500 to $10,000,
that is quite a shift. The intent of going at the higher
end is to future-proof this
legislation, so we're not having to come back regularly and update that
fine again.
Other jurisdictions, Australia, for
example, sits a little bit below that.
It's more like, I think, $6,500. But it's within
a reasonable bracket, I think.
The other key change within it is effectively
taking away the differentiation between
the distinctive badges
and the military decorations piece and bringing that all under the
one section in terms of the offense
piece
and the potential fine for that as well.
So rather than having two distinct pieces, it's just the one if you are
wearing distinctive badges or medals, military decorations
inappropriately, then you are captured under the same
consequence in terms of a potential $10,000 fine or
one month
imprisonment, which is already in the legislation
currently.
The
other portion of the fine that will be removed is the old terminology, 20
pounds. So you can see it's been quite some time since that's been updated.
So I think an appropriate reflection because the issue here is that what I'm trying
to achieve is to create a stronger deterrent for people carrying
out these sorts of actions.
If there's the risk of up to a $10,000 fine, that is the maximum
level, not a requirement, then hopefully that acts as a deterrent for people who
might otherwise seek to misrepresent themselves.
So pretty straightforward there.
And then the other tweak I have made is just to modernize the
language slightly, where it has previously referred to someone
misrepresenting himself, as it was when the
legislation came in in 1918, only men serving in the military.
Of course, now we have many women serving in our
defense forces as well, and so it's appropriate to update that
to themselves to cover that aspect as well.
So pretty straightforward changes there. Happy to take questions on that, Mr.
Chair, and welcome the committee's input. Thank you.
Thank you. And just before I move to questions, can I just congratulate you on
having the bill drawn, and thank you for-
Thanks
... bringing this important update. Appreciate that.
Te Ano Tuiono.
Yeah.
I was wondering how you got to the $10,000.
I mean, that's a big whack.
Mm-hmm.
And I hear that it's a maximum. Did you look at
comparable fines
that hit the $10,000 mark, and exactly what were those?
Yeah.
And so I was wondering if you had thought about other options up to the 10,000.
And, I mean, 20 pounds, ages ago.
Wow.
I take that point, but did you look at what 20 pounds looks like in 2026?
Mm-hmm.
Because then you would be carrying forth the intention, the original intention.
So maybe 20 pounds is $10,000 today, but I don't know.
Yeah, sure.
Yeah.
Yep. No, fair point. As I touched on, the intent really was to try
and avoid needing to come back every
10, 20
years to modernize the legislation and for it to act as a
deterrent. And so, when we look at that last update,
which brought in the $500 piece back in the early '80s,
through inflation, that would put it just shy of,
I think, about $3,000
at that 500 level. We've merged those two sections.
I haven't actually got the 20-pound equivalent in
current currency.
It could be $20,000.
Yeah. Possibly. But
I guess where I'm getting to is I had a look at some overseas jurisdictions.
As I mentioned, Australia sits aroundJust shy of
$7,000, I think it is.
Yeah.
So, from that perspective, it's not significantly different.
Sure, it's a bit higher. But again, if we're not having to
amend this law, and I accept that as
much as some people see this as very important,
for any government of the day, it might not necessarily register as a high
priority to amend. Hence why it's come forward as a member's bill in this
situation. And indeed, hopefully, we can avoid needing
to modernize it by having the fine perhaps slightly at the higher end initially.
But I think over time that will be a reasonable level.
And as I say, it is a maximum, and I would expect some discretion to be
shown based on the severity of offense within that.
Would you be open to-
Yeah
... looking at those other options, just so that there's a rationale?
Mm-hmm.
So that when people are explaining the bill, they'll go, "Actually,
the year 19 whatever, £20 is this, and that's what we've done."
And of course, if it's more severe than it, you could go up.
Well.
Otherwise, it's trying to explain $10,000
is tricky.
Hmm. Yeah, sure. Certainly open to feedback from submitters on that.
Welcome their views on where an appropriate level
would be.
But as I say, the key driver is to try and act as a deterrent in the first place to
stop this sort of behavior from happening.
We've got
about three minutes left. Laura, Greg, and Greg.
Great.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the member for bringing this bill to the
House.
My question really is around stolen valor and
how prevalent that is actually in New Zealand.
We see it's quite big overseas-
Mm-hmm
... the US, for example. Do you have any
idea on how big this issue is?
Yeah.
Or is this something maybe more for the officials?
Yeah, look, it can be a bit challenging to measure,
because we haven't seen a large number of prosecutions.
But anecdotally-
Mm-hmm
... feedback I've heard
from current and former service personnel is
that there are a number of scenarios where they
believe it is occurring,
particularly around those key events like ANZAC Day.
Mm-hmm.
Right? And there's a couple of different ways that can manifest, too.
It can be a scenario where someone turns up with a rack of
medals, they've had no military service whatsoever.
Mm-hmm.
They are totally misrepresenting themselves as something they are not.
Or it could be at what I would deem probably the lesser
end of the offending, where someone has served and has some medals,
but then has added on, for whatever reason, one or two
others. And indeed, there's actually an interesting question
that I am sure will come up from submitters as well.
Because you can serve in the New Zealand Defence Force and
receive a medal for some
overseas service from a foreign government, for example.
Mm-hmm.
But you're not necessarily entitled to wear that
back home in New Zealand.
Mm-hmm.
That's up to DPMC to determine the
process for that. And so that, I think, is
an interesting distinction, because someone could potentially wear that.
I don't know that I buy the argument they would do that unknowingly, because I
think if you've served in the military, you're quite well aware of when you should
or should not be wearing medals, and what medals are appropriate to
wear.
But again, I would say that's probably at a slightly different level of offending
to someone-
Yeah
... who's never served and has a whole rack of medals suggesting they have.
Hence, the expectation that there's discretion within that fine if a conviction
occurs.
We'll sneak in one from Greg O'Connor.
Yeah. Just the equivalent of the 10,000 is
2,800 today.
As is the other fine, which is 2,600 from the
'81 fine. It's a huge leap.
Just the question is, what else is $10,000 fine?
You heard the speeches, there's
very much in favor of this. But I personally think the
leap to 10,000,
it's triple,
basically what it was, and the
rationale for tripling it. Because I would've thought
just after the First World War, when this was brought in,
this was huge. You look at even some of our rules in the House
now around calling people cowards and not being
able to make reference to the fact they didn't take part in the war.
That's how huge that was.
I don't think that would be as quite an issue now.
So to conflate that to being three times
greater the offense, and I know you're inflation-proofing it, but I don't think
your Minister of Finance would be that happy about you
anticipating
inflation going to that sort of
levels even over the next 10, 20 years.
So I personally think it's probably a bit
high to go straight to that level when we know exactly what the
equivalent is, given nothing else has changed,
really.
Mm-hmm. Okay.
It was brought in after the First World War, that's the
height of these things.
We are
out of time there, and then I'm sure we can get into a debate about the gold
standard, which would put it at 18,000 today if you take that standard from
1918. But there'll be plenty of time for that during submissions.
The amazing gold.
No, but it was worth 4.8 ounces of gold.
Thank you.
Appreciate your time, Mr. van der Maaten. You can return to your normal duties now.
In fact, we're going to now move, if you'd like to ...
You can come back to yourself.
I'll just sit to the side.
Yeah. And we'll take the legislative